---
title: "The phase diagram of Ti-6Al-4V at high-pressures and high-temperatures"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-ti-64
excerpt: ''
date: 2021-02-18
venue: 'Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-648X/abdffa'
citation: 'S. G. Macleod, D. Errandonea, G. A. Cox, H. Cynn, D. Daisenberger, S. E. Finnegan, M. I. McMahon, K. A. Munro, C. Popescu, <b>C. V. Storm</b>. <i>The phase diagram of Ti-6Al-4V at high-pressures and high-temperatures</i>, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 33, 154001 (2021).'
---

We report results from a series of diamond-anvil-cell synchrotron x-ray diffraction and large-volume-press experiments, and calculations, to investigate the phase diagram of commercial polycrystalline high-strength Ti-6Al-4V alloy in pressure–temperature space. Up to ∼30 GPa and 886 K, Ti-6Al-4V is found to be stable in the hexagonal-close-packed, or α phase. The effect of temperature on the volume expansion and compressibility of α–Ti-6Al-4V is modest. The martensitic α → ω (hexagonal) transition occurs at ∼30 GPa, with both phases coexisting until at ∼38–40 GPa the transition to the ω phase is completed. Between 300 K and 844 K the α → ω transition appears to be independent of temperature. ω–Ti-6Al-4V is stable to ∼91 GPa and 844 K, the highest combined pressure and temperature reached in these experiments. Pressure–volume–temperature equations-of-state for the α and ω phases of Ti-6Al-4V are generated and found to be similar to pure Ti. A pronounced hysteresis is observed in the ω–Ti-6Al-4V on decompression, with the hexagonal structure reverting back to the α phase at pressures below ∼9 GPa at room temperature, and at a higher pressure at elevated temperatures. Based on our data, we estimate the Ti-6Al-4V α–β–ω triple point to occur at ∼900 K and 30 GPa, in good agreement with our calculations.